Believe me, it's not easy to stand
in front of a sea of people.
So imagine what it must mean
to experience bullying.
Bullying: these physical
or verbal assaults that occur in schools
and are also known as school harassment.
It is one of the most serious and
discussed social issues in recent times,
even if five or ten years ago
I guess that few, if any of us,
had heard of this word.
On the other hand, this isn't new,
it's something that has always happened.
Indeed, regardless of our age,
we all have been faced one way
or another with this type of situation,
either because we were bullied ourselves
or because we were part of the problem
and victimized our poor classmates
in our childhood,
or simply witnessed such an act.
Previously called 'to make the
laughingstock of someone, '
it's now called 'bullying.'
I believe that what's happening
now and we're calling bullying
is, in fact, something new.
It has traces of what it used to be,
but it's not exactly the same.
For several reasons.
First, we didn't have
a word for it before,
a word to name this phenomenon
or, at least, it wasn't 'bullying'.
It was not in the news,
it wasn't discussed in the media,
no laws were enacted to ban or condemn it.
Of course, it could be a source
of suffering for many people,
and indeed it was,
but it was deem as something
more or less normal,
maybe an unintended result,
a school life side effect,
but not that serious an issue.
Some people might even think
that it supported education.
And something equally important is
that, at that same time, until recently,
there were other school dramas
that were considered more serious
than these small, unimportant fights
during recess and in the hallways.
I talk about referrals,
expulsions, even bad grades.
Both students and teachers,
parents and society in general
thought those to be much more important
than what we now call bullying,
although now, it tends to be the opposite:
bad grades and disciplinary reprimands
seem to be less important,
while this new bullying phenomenon
takes an increasingly central role.
As a result, we face a simultaneous
and complementary movement
that is happening at the same time.
On the one hand, traditional reasons
for school humiliation,
punishments applied by an authority
such as a teacher or a principal,
to students who did something
that was considered wrong,
forbidden by regulations
or simply shouldn't be done,
such as misbehaving
or not studying, lose relevance.
On the other hand, new reasons
for school humiliation gain ground,
such as punishments
that students apply to each other
mostly for causes related
to the victim's physical
appearance or personality.
And if this is what it happens
then the question is why?
Why this change in our values?
I think we live in a time of historical
change and it's worth thinking about it.
We can consider that, on one hand,
the reasons for school humiliation,
and the traditional school conflicts
like referrals, expulsions, bad grades,
go back to guilt, guilt for wrongdoing.
Guilt is an internal, private emotion
which points back to a moral conflict
and a personal drama we suffer from
because we have done something
that not only regulations
forbid because is wrong
but everyone else agrees
is wrong including myself.
I feel guilty because I did something bad.
In the case of bullying
guilt is not at stake,
but another emotion: shame.
It's not exactly the same,
it is quite different.
Shame is a public emotion,
it doesn't point
to a private drama for wrongdoing.
When I feel ashamed,
the problem isn't me
but the others, their gaze,
those who judge me in an inappropriate,
unfair, and sometimes cruel way,
regardless of my being
guilty of wrongdoing or not.
Generally speaking, I'm not the
one to be blamed for anything.
It's the others who hold power
on me through that cruel gaze.
This is a shift in balance
where shame becomes
more important than guilt
and this is key to understanding
why our priorities are changing.
I think that the alien gaze,
the gaze of the other,
something that was
obviously always important,
gained a disproportionate,
perhaps an excessive importance,
especially when it comes to judgments
on who people are and what are they worth.
And this wasn't always the case,
that's why I said we live in times
of a great historical change
and a very complex one as well.
It's not something new,
it's been brewing for decades,
and now it's finally crystallizing.
I think one of the most important
ingredients of this transformation
is the abandonment of the idea
of our own inner self.
What is that?
It was a fundamental belief
during the past 200 years,
in the 19th and 20th centuries,
a conviction that we have an inner life,
essential but invisible to the prying eye,
a condition believed to define each of us
in a much deeper and truthful way
than false appearances.
Appearances were considered
false and also vain, frivolous,
something of minor importance
compared with all the forcefulness
of that true and inner beauty.
These values and beliefs are
within us, but we're leaving them behind.
It seems pretty clear to me
that false appearances
are not that empty anymore:
just think of this whole phenomenon
of the cult of the body recently promoted,
the importance of the personal image,
of physical appearance,
the gyms, aesthetic treatments, all that.
Also, what is seen and perceived is more
and every time increasingly important.
And this notion that the most
important thing that defines us
something that can't be seen
--not the guts--,
something intangible
like the soul or the spirit, is lost.
It seems we believe less and less in that
and more and more in what others can see,
what we prove others, what we do.
Based on these changes,
the others judge us by what they see
and less by this notion
of an ethereal inwardness
a quite outdated Victorian notion
that would be truer
than acts and appearances.
Along with all this, there are a series
of other transformation signs,
one being self-promotion.
Self-promotion tactics
or techniques are now ubiquitous
and until recently considered bad taste.
Take, for example, the obsession
to get the largest number
of followers or 'likes'
in order to prove that you are
someone, that you exist,
that you have value
and deserve admiration.
The whole social networks phenomenon
could also be understood
as proof of this transformation;
toghether with the success
of social networks on the Internet,
as well as a set of many other symptoms
and contemporary phenomena,
ranging from tattoos to plastic surgery,
reality shows, and bullying.
I believe that in this broader context
it's not surprising that bullying has
turned into something so serious today
while school referrals and bad grades
are becoming less and less relevant.
It seems that guilt lost much
of its moralizing effectiveness.
Guilt isn't as effective as shame
in our lives anymore.
And, of course, this is very complicated
because it requires managing
two seemingly contradictory trends:
on one hand, we have to display
ourselves, we have to sell ourselves
for the others to see who we are,
what we are and what we do,
we need to cultivate and sell our image.
But on the other hand, there's always
the risk that the gaze of the others
won't return admiration but rejection,
ridiculing or being ignored.
We have become
more vulnerable to the gaze of others
for that same reason.
Consider also how complicated
cyberbullying is,
when these slurs and sneers
spread across social networks,
YouTube, Facebook, etc.,
and what used to be private,
limited to the handful of friends,
or protected by school or home walls,
is suddenly exposed to millions of people.
We all know how shame
evolves to being unbearable,
much more serious and leaving us
with no place to hide,
neither within ourselves
nor in a private place,
unable to dreaming
of escaping to a desert island
--which are less and less now or no longer
exist, at least not without WiFi--.
It seems that this idea
that hell is other people
has turned truer today
in the era of the permanent connection
and profiles always available
on thousands of screens.
They are ccompanied by this addiction
we grow for the 'like' button,
that magic click we hope
everybody would grant us
for any selfie or whatever
we post online about ourselves.
If all this historical change
is taking place right now
with these consequences and effects,
the question is: what do we do?
Is this better or worse
than before? Is it good or bad?
How do we solve it?
The bad news is that I have no solution,
but I think I have some recommendations.
I think that both guilt and shame
are mechanisms of social control,
and the fact that guilt is losing
much of its vigor now
while shame is magnified
is neither good nor bad in itself.
But we must bear it in mind,
it means that things have already changed,
and if we continue to think
that what happens now is the same
as what happened before,
and we try to solve it
as if they were the same,
probably we won't get very far.
I wanted to share this with you.
Thank you.
(Applause)